8.14.0 Release notes (#5155)
elastic/security-docs: docs/release-notes/8.14.asciidoc

[[release-notes-header-8.14.0]]
== 8.14

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.14.0]]
=== 8.14.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.14.0]]
==== New features
* Introduces Attack discovery, a new feature that uses AI to identify potential attacks and help you quickly triage multiple alerts ({kibana-pull}181818[#181818]).
* Creates the **Asset criticality** page within the **Manage** menu, which lets you assign asset criticality levels to your assets ({kibana-pull}179891[#179891]).

> * Adds alert suppression for New Terms rules ({kibana-pull}178294[#178294]).

Reviewer: 👍🏽

> * Enables alert suppression for New Terms rules ({kibana-pull}178294[#178294]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Adds alert suppression for New Terms rules ({kibana-pull}178294[#178294]).
```

> * Adds alert suppression for EQL rules with non-sequence queries ({kibana-pull}176422[#176422]).

Reviewer: 👍🏽

> * Enables alert suppression for rules with non-sequence EQL queries ({kibana-pull}176422[#176422]).

Author: Just a minor tweak here :)

```suggestion
* Adds alert suppression for EQL rules with non-sequence queries ({kibana-pull}176422[#176422]).
```

* Adds a **Setup guide** markdown field to custom rules ({kibana-pull}178131[#178131]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.14.0]]
==== Enhancements

> * Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {esql}; it is now GA ({kibana-pull}180838[#180838]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {esql}; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}180838[#180838]).
```

> * Allows you to add newly-created fields to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).

Reviewer: What do you think of this? I think this sounds good, but wonder if this gives a bit more context - 
```suggestion
* Allows you to add query defined fields to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).
```

> * Allows you to add newly created fields to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Allows you to add newly-created fields to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).
```

> * Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `general:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).

Reviewer 3: * Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {custom query rules suppression}; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}181698[#[181698]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `general:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for custom query rule alert suppression; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}181698[#[181698]).
```

> * Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `discover:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `general:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).
```

* Makes conversations with Elastic AI Assistant persist across sessions ({kibana-pull}173487[#173487]).
* Adds conversation streaming for Elastic AI Assistant ({kibana-pull}180095[#180095]).
* Adds support for Anthropic Claude 3 to the Amazon Bedrock connector, and makes it the default model ({kibana-pull}179304[#179304]).
* Adds an **AI Assistant** settings section to the **Management** menu ({kibana-pull}176656[#176656]).

> * Adds the `_source` field to the Alert details flyout's JSON view ({kibana-pull}180477[#180477]).

Author: @PhilippeOberti how does this improve the user's experience with the JSON tab in the alert details flyout? I vaguely remember this conversation in one our Slack threads, but could use a refresher. Thanks! 

```suggestion
* Adds the `_source` field to the alert details flyout's JSON view ({kibana-pull}180477[#180477]).
```

Reviewer 4: some people were missing it, and pointing that Discover has it, so in a sense yes it does improve the experience for some users!

* Improves the UI for row renderers in Timeline ({kibana-pull}180669[#180669]).

> * Allows data collected by AuditBeat to appear in Session View ({kibana-pull}179985[#179985]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allows data collected by Auditbeat to appear in Session View ({kibana-pull}179985[#179985]).
```

* Improves the visual appearance of the asset criticality alert column ({kibana-pull}180868[#180868]).

> * Adds an advanced setting that disables alert enrichment via memory scanning for malicious behavior alerts ({kibana-pull}180636[#180636]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Adds an advanced setting that allows you to turn off alert enrichment from memory scanning for malicious behavior alerts ({kibana-pull}180636[#180636]).
```

* Adds an advanced setting that lets you turn off a performance optimization that makes malware on-write and file event processing asynchronous ({kibana-pull}179179[#179179]).

> * Makes the alert details flyout's state persist ({kibana-pull}178746[#178746], {kibana-pull}179511[#179511]).

Author: @PhilippeOberti would you mind verifying that the small addition I made below is correct? Thank you!

```suggestion
* Makes the alert details flyout's state persist in your browser ({kibana-pull}178746[#178746], {kibana-pull}179511[#179511]).
```

Reviewer 4: this is correct, though you could say _Makes some of the alert and event details flyout's state persist_:
- it's not the entire state that persists
- this would be applied to non-alert flyout as well

Author: ```suggestion
* Makes some of the flyout's state persist for alert and event details ({kibana-pull}178746[#178746], {kibana-pull}179511[#179511]).
```

* Limits the alerts that can affect an entity's risk score to the 10,000 riskiest ({kibana-pull}178324[#178324]).

> * Adds a tooltip to the **Asset Criticality** section of the Alerts flyout ({kibana-pull}176927[#176927]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Adds a tooltip to the **Asset Criticality** section of the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}176927[#176927]).
```

> * Updates prebuilt rule mappings to MITRE ATT&CK version 14.1 ({kibana-pull}174120[#174120]).

Reviewer 5: Not sure if this is entirely accurate.

It's not only about prebuilt rules, which indeed the TRaDE team updated to MITRE v14.1, and Kibana v8.14.0 users will get these rules as soon as they _upgrade them_ manually (meaning, it won't happen automatically). Users will be using MITRE v14.1 for custom rules too, when they create new rules or edit existing rules.

Also, to me "Updates ... rule mappings" sounds like we're migrating data of installed/created rules to the new MITRE version, which is not the case. The rules created using prior MITRE versions will stay unchanged.

```suggestion
* Updates MITRE ATT&CK framework to version 14.1 ({kibana-pull}174120[#174120]).
```

* Improves the Entity Analytics dashboard load time ({kibana-pull}179510[#179510]).
* Fixes a bug that didn't allow you to save Timelines if your {kib} account name was an email address ({kibana-pull}181709[#181709]).
* Moves the `observer.serial_number` field to the Highlighted Fields section for alerts generated by SentinelOne and removes the {agent} status field ({kibana-pull}181038[#181038]).
* Fixes an issue that caused {kib} Task Manager to become overloaded when rules were bulk enabled ({kibana-pull}180796[#180796]).
* Ensures {ml} rules can be previewed while creating a new rule ({kibana-pull}180792[#180792]).
* Fixes a UI bug on the rule details page for EQL and {esql} rules that caused the **Custom query** label to incorrectly display in the rule type field ({kibana-pull}178821[#178821]).
* Deactivates the **Create new list** option if you attempt to import another exception list for the Endpoint Security rule ({kibana-pull}178674[#178674]).
* Fixes a bug that stopped indicator filters from working correctly on the Intelligence page ({kibana-pull}179607[#179607]).

> * Fixes the loading page layout on the Intelligence page. Also improves the Indicators table loading speed after you set up a threat intelligence integration ({kibana-pull}178701[#178701]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Fixes the loading page layout on the Intelligence page. Also improves the Indicators table loading speed after you set up a threat intelligence integration ({kibana-pull}178701[#178701]).
* Fixes a bug that caused the wrong {security-app} page name to display in your browser tab ({kibana-pull}181056[#181056]).
```

[[release-notes-header-8.14.0]]
== 8.14

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.14.0]]
=== 8.14.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.14.0]]
==== New features
* Introduces Attack discovery, a new feature that uses AI to identify potential attacks and help you quickly triage multiple alerts ({kibana-pull}181818[#181818]).
* Creates the **Asset criticality** page within the **Manage** menu, which lets you assign asset criticality levels to your assets ({kibana-pull}179891[#179891]).
* Adds alert suppression for New Terms rules ({kibana-pull}178294[#178294]).
* Adds alert suppression for EQL rules with non-sequence queries ({kibana-pull}176422[#176422]).
* Adds a **Setup guide** markdown field to custom rules ({kibana-pull}178131[#178131]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.14.0]]
==== Enhancements
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {esql}; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}180838[#180838]).
* Allows you to add calculated values to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).
* Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `general:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).

> * Removes the "Technical preview" tag for custom query rule alert suppression; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}181698[#[181698]).

Author: Changing the PR number from the backport PR to the original PR and removing an extra bracket. 

```suggestion
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for custom query rule alert suppression; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}181279[#181279]).
```

[[release-notes-header-8.14.0]]
== 8.14

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.14.0]]
=== 8.14.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.14.0]]
==== New features
* Introduces Attack discovery, a new feature that uses AI to identify potential attacks and help you quickly triage multiple alerts ({kibana-pull}181818[#181818]).

> * Creates the **Asset criticality** page within the **Manage** menu, which lets you assign asset criticality levels to your assets ({kibana-pull}179891[#179891]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Creates the **Asset criticality** page within the **Manage** menu, which lets you bulk assign asset criticality levels to your assets ({kibana-pull}179891[#179891]).
```
Slightly more precise, since users can already assign asset criticality without using this new page.

* Adds an **AI Assistant** settings section to the **Management** menu ({kibana-pull}176656[#176656]).
* Updates the **AI Assistant** design from modal to flyout ({kibana-pull}176657[#176657]).
* Adds the `_source` field to the alert details flyout's JSON view ({kibana-pull}180477[#180477]).
* Improves the UI for row renderers in Timeline ({kibana-pull}180669[#180669]).
* Allows data collected by Auditbeat to appear in Session View ({kibana-pull}179985[#179985]).
* Improves the visual appearance of the asset criticality alert column ({kibana-pull}180868[#180868]).
* Adds an advanced setting that allows you to turn off alert enrichment from memory scanning for malicious behavior alerts ({kibana-pull}180636[#180636]).
* Adds an advanced setting that lets you turn off a performance optimization that makes malware on-write and file event processing asynchronous ({kibana-pull}179179[#179179]).
* Makes some of the flyout's state persist for alert and event details ({kibana-pull}178746[#178746], {kibana-pull}179511[#179511]).
* Limits the alerts that can affect an entity's risk score to the 10,000 riskiest ({kibana-pull}178324[#178324]).

> * Adds a tooltip to the **Asset Criticality** section of the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}176927[#176927]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Adds a tooltip to the **Asset Criticality** section of the entity details flyout ({kibana-pull}176927[#176927]).
```

[[release-notes-header-8.14.0]]
== 8.14

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.14.0]]
=== 8.14.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.14.0]]
==== New features
* Introduces Attack discovery, a new feature that uses AI to identify potential attacks and help you quickly triage multiple alerts ({kibana-pull}181818[#181818]).
* Creates the **Asset criticality** page within the **Manage** menu, which lets you bulk assign asset criticality levels to your assets ({kibana-pull}179891[#179891]).
* Adds alert suppression for New Terms rules ({kibana-pull}178294[#178294]).
* Adds alert suppression for EQL rules with non-sequence queries ({kibana-pull}176422[#176422]).
* Allows you to edit value lists from the UI, anywhere you use them ({kibana-pull}179339[#179339]).
* Adds a **Setup guide** markdown field to custom rules ({kibana-pull}178131[#178131]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.14.0]]
==== Enhancements

> * Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {esql}; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}180838[#180838]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for {esql} and makes it generally available ({kibana-pull}180838[#180838]).
```

* Allows you to add calculated values to an {esql} rule's highlighted fields ({kibana-pull}177746[#177746]).

> * Connects {esql} functionality in {elastic-sec} to the `general:enableESQL` advanced setting ({kibana-pull}181616[#181616]).

Reviewer 7: Can we bundle these together? E.g., `The following {esql} enhancements have been added in 8.14:` or something to that effect.

Author: Hmm, even if 181616 modifies existing ES|QL functionality in Security, I think it's significant enough to warrant being documented separately. The PR essentially allows users to turn ES|QL on/off throughout the entire Security app, wherever ES|QL is used.

> * Removes the "Technical preview" tag for custom query rule alert suppression; it is now generally available ({kibana-pull}181279[#181279]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Removes the "Technical preview" tag for custom query rule alert suppression and makes it generally available ({kibana-pull}181279[#181279]).
```

* Makes conversations with Elastic AI Assistant persist across sessions ({kibana-pull}173487[#173487]).
* Adds conversation streaming for Elastic AI Assistant ({kibana-pull}180095[#180095]).

> * Adds support for Anthropic Claude 3 to the Amazon Bedrock connector, and makes it the default model ({kibana-pull}179304[#179304]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Adds support for Anthropic Claude 3 to the Amazon Bedrock connector and makes it the default model ({kibana-pull}179304[#179304]).
```

* Adds the `_source` field to the alert details flyout's JSON view ({kibana-pull}180477[#180477]).
* Improves the UI for row renderers in Timeline ({kibana-pull}180669[#180669]).
* Allows data collected by Auditbeat to appear in Session View ({kibana-pull}179985[#179985]).
* Improves the visual appearance of the asset criticality alert column ({kibana-pull}180868[#180868]).
* Adds an advanced setting that allows you to turn off alert enrichment from memory scanning for malicious behavior alerts ({kibana-pull}180636[#180636]).
* Adds an advanced setting that lets you turn off a performance optimization that makes malware on-write and file event processing asynchronous ({kibana-pull}179179[#179179]).
* Makes some of the flyout's state persist for alert and event details ({kibana-pull}178746[#178746], {kibana-pull}179511[#179511]).
* Limits the alerts that can affect an entity's risk score to the 10,000 riskiest ({kibana-pull}178324[#178324]).
* Adds a tooltip to the **Asset Criticality** section of the entity details flyout ({kibana-pull}176927[#176927]).
* Updates MITRE ATT&CK framework to version 14.1 ({kibana-pull}174120[#174120]).

> * Allows you can choose whether {elastic-defend} scans files when they're modified or executed ({kibana-pull}179176[#179176]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Allows you to choose whether {elastic-defend} scans files when they're modified or executed ({kibana-pull}179176[#179176]).
```

> * Allows you to configure {elastic-defend}'s malware protection to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for Windows endpoints ({kibana-pull}180484[#180484]).

Reviewer 8: > Allows you to configure {elastic-defend}'s malware protection to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for windows endpoints

Slight adjustment, maybe "sync" rather than "configure" (Allows you to sync {elastic-defend}'s malware protection to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for windows endpoints)? Or, "Allows you to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for windows endpoints when {elastic-defend}'s malware protection is set to prevent."

Author: I like the second one! Thanks for the review 👍🏼 

```suggestion
* Allows you can choose whether {elastic-defend} scans files when they're modified or executed ({kibana-pull}179176[#179176]).
* Allows you to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for Windows endpoints when {elastic-defend}'s malware protection is set to prevent ({kibana-pull}180484[#180484]).
```

> * Allows you to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for Windows endpoints when {elastic-defend}'s malware protection is set to prevent ({kibana-pull}180484[#180484]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Allows you to automatically register {elastic-defend} as the antivirus software for Windows endpoints when {elastic-defend}'s malware protection has prevention enabled ({kibana-pull}180484[#180484]).
```

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.14.0]]
==== Bug fixes
* Fixes a bug that prevented the **{esql}** Timeline tab from being turned off after you removed the `xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental: ["timelineEsqlTabDisabled"]` feature flag from the {kib} user settings ({kibana-pull}182816[#182816]).
* Fixes a bug that removed pinned events and comments in unsaved Timelines ({kibana-pull}178212[#178212]).
* Fixes a bug in Timeline that prevented the **Show top _x_** action from showing accurate results ({kibana-pull}177213[#177213]).
* Fixes a bug with the `is one of` Timeline filter that generated incorrect Query Domain Specific Language (DSL) queries ({kibana-pull}180455[#180455]).
* Ensures the `securitySolution:enableAssetCriticality` advanced setting is enabled before the asset criticality levels to your entities are updated ({kibana-pull}181780[#181780]).

> * Corrects the color theme for the entity risk score UI to ensure it works on dark mode ({kibana-pull}181431[#181431]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Corrects the color theme for the entity risk score UI to ensure it works in dark mode ({kibana-pull}181431[#181431]).
```

* Improves the Entity Analytics dashboard load time ({kibana-pull}179510[#179510]).
* Fixes a bug that didn't allow you to save Timelines if your {kib} account name was an email address ({kibana-pull}181709[#181709]).
* Moves the `observer.serial_number` field to the Highlighted Fields section for alerts generated by SentinelOne and removes the {agent} status field ({kibana-pull}181038[#181038]).
* Fixes an issue that caused {kib} Task Manager to become overloaded when rules were bulk enabled ({kibana-pull}180796[#180796]).

> * Ensures {ml} rules can be previewed while creating a new rule ({kibana-pull}180792[#180792]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Ensures you can preview {ml} rules while creating a new rule ({kibana-pull}180792[#180792]).
```

* Fixes a UI bug on the rule details page for EQL and {esql} rules that caused the **Custom query** label to incorrectly display in the rule type field ({kibana-pull}178821[#178821]).
* Deactivates the **Create new list** option if you attempt to import another exception list for the Endpoint Security rule ({kibana-pull}178674[#178674]).
* Fixes a bug that stopped indicator filters from working correctly on the Intelligence page ({kibana-pull}179607[#179607]).

> * Fixes the loading page layout on the Intelligence page. Also improves the Indicators table loading speed after you set up a threat intelligence integration ({kibana-pull}178701[#178701]).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Fixes the loading page layout on the Intelligence page, and improves the Indicators table loading speed after you set up a threat intelligence integration ({kibana-pull}178701[#178701]).
```

* Updates MITRE ATT&CK framework to `v14.1` ({kibana-pull}174120[#174120]).
* Security AI Assistant persistent storage ({kibana-pull}173487[#173487]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.14.0]]
==== Bug fixes
* Fixes a bug that prevented the **{esql}** Timeline tab from being turned off after you removed the `xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental: ["timelineEsqlTabDisabled"]` feature flag from the {kib} user settings ({kibana-pull}182816[#182816]).
* Fixes a bug that removed pinned events and comments in unsaved Timelines ({kibana-pull}178212[#178212]).
* Fixes a bug in Timeline that prevented the **Show top _x_** action from showing accurate results ({kibana-pull}177213[#177213]).
* Fixes a bug with the `is one of` Timeline filter that generated incorrect Query Domain Specific Language (DSL) queries ({kibana-pull}180455[#180455]).
* Ensures the `securitySolution:enableAssetCriticality` advanced setting is enabled before the asset criticality levels to your entities are updated ({kibana-pull}181780[#181780]).
* Corrects the color theme for the entity risk score UI to ensure it works on dark mode ({kibana-pull}181431[#181431]).

> * Fixes a bug that caused the Entity Analytics dashboard to make too many risk_score/index_status requests ({kibana-pull}179510[#179510]).

Author: @machadoum was the issue here that the Entity Analytics dashboard requested risk score updates too often? I'm trying to understand what the risk_score/index_status requests return.

Reviewer 9: `risk_score/index_status` verifies if the risk engine is enabled and running before displaying the risk score to the user.

This is a performance fix. The frontend code was firing many unnecessary HTTP requests. Users won't visually notice any difference except that the page might be more responsive.

Author: Thanks for the additional context, @machadoum. Would the following work?

```suggestion
* Improves the responsiveness of the Entity Analytics dashboard ({kibana-pull}179510[#179510]).
```

Reviewer 9: I would prefer something like: "Improves the Entity Analytics page load time"

Author: ```suggestion
* Improves the Entity Analytics dashboard load time ({kibana-pull}179510[#179510]).
```

> * Escape username correctly ({kibana-pull}181709[#181709]).

Author: @lgestc can you provide a more descriptive release note summary for this bug fix?

Reviewer 10: How about "Escape kibana username correctly when creating timelines. This solves timeline creation errors on sso-based accounts where account name is an email"

Author: Thanks, @lgestc - this is helpful. Would the following revision work?

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that didn't allow you to save Timelines if your {kib} account name was an email address ({kibana-pull}181709[#181709]).
```

Reviewer 10: sure!

* Moves the `observer.serial_number` field to the Highlighted Fields section for alerts generated by SentinelOne and removes the {agent} status field ({kibana-pull}181038[#181038]).

> * Migrate bulk enable/diable rules to Alerting methods ({kibana-pull}180796[#180796]).

Author: @xcrzx can you provide a more descriptive release note summary for this bug fix?

Reviewer 11: Maybe something like "When bulk enabled, rules now do not flood the task manager, improving performance."?

Author: @xcrzx how's this:

```suggestion
* Fixes an issue that caused {kib} Task Manager to become overloaded when rules were bulk enabled ({kibana-pull}180796[#180796]).
```

Reviewer 11: Yup, that sounds good 👍
